Welcome to Politics and Science.
Politics and Science can be heard weekly on WMRW LP1 95.1 FM, airing on Wednesdays at
5 p.m. and Sundays at noon.
And in the Bellows Falls area, it can be heard on WULL LP Bellows Falls at 101.1 FM, airing
from 3 to 4 p.m. on Sundays and from 9 to 10 a.m. on Mondays.
Politics and Science presents the viewpoints of its participants and does not necessarily
reflect the viewpoints of any other person or organization.
And my guest today on Politics and Science is Raymond Peat, endocrinologist and physiologist
from Eugene, Oregon.
And Ray, how are you today?
Good.
Hands like...
And Ray, maybe you should give your resume a bit, Ray, because obviously you can do it
better than I.
Oh, well, I'm not sure I can.
Okay.
I was a humanities person first, and while I was studying painting and literature and
such, I was interested in science and read widely in libraries and encyclopedias and
such.
And my first teaching job while I was studying linguistics at Ohio State was in a little
college where I got assigned to teach biology.
And that, because I had been reading in it for so long, the experience of teaching it
was fun.
So I taught art and English for a few years after that, but finally decided to go back
to graduate school in 1968 to study biology, actually, in a university.
And my first courses in the sciences didn't impress me that I would be able to learn much
in a university.
Same in English and philosophy and psychology and other departments I tried being a graduate
student in.
I basically felt that the institutions were anti-educational, that their purpose was to
prepare people to conform, to get a job and go along with the system.
But by the time I finally decided to be a biologist, I had learned how to be quiet enough
that I could get through the degree program.
The graduate school experience, I think most people, having done it, recognize that it's
exercise in conformism rather than anything very special about learning.
You mean that they're looking for certain behavioral patterns from their students?
In the '60s, a psychologist at Oregon State University did a study of academic success
and how students had scored on the Miller Analogies test, which is somewhat a test of
cultural knowledge.
You have to know the language, but it's partly a study of mental flexibility and ability
to reason about new problems.
She found that the students who scored average on the Miller Analogies test were the straight
A, very successful students in graduate school.
The ones who deviated from the average, either up or down, were the less successful in graduate
school.
Meaning that having an average ability and conforming really is the way to be an outstanding
graduate student.
So after you were a graduate student, you got your PhD in...
In 1972.
Okay.
And I actually took more courses in biochemistry than in biology, but the degree was in biology.
Right.
And since then you've taught at a number of universities, I believe.
Yeah.
I taught some courses at the University of Oregon, but also in Mexico, University of
Veracruz, and State University of Mexico.
And you write extensively in a newsletter that I know of called Ray Peat's Newsletter.
Yeah.
I've been doing that since 1981, when I, having had essentially all of my research rejected
by the journals, I decided just to go ahead and publish my own things and not have to
deal with editors.
I had sent some very simple, critical things as letters to editors, for example, Science
Magazine, pointing out that they were drawing racist conclusions from evidence that had
absolutely nothing to do with their conclusions.
And even a little two sentence criticism like that was rejected as being more extreme than
the authors of the study I was commenting on.
And I considered science to be so political that I decided to publish my own books and
newsletters.
I think some of your writings are what prompted me to name the show Politics and Science,
because the two seem very closely interwoven.
In fact, they seem to be able to not escape from each other, and to the detriment of science,
I'm afraid.
Yeah.
In the '50s, including when I first started teaching biology, my course was officially
named Biology Introduction for Physics Majors.
And since the students were planning to major in physics, I thought that the biological
work should find something that would relate to their interests.
And I thought that information technology, how the organism was interpreted as information
and radiation biology, how the organism interacted with radiation, I thought those were things
that would be important to physics majors.
And the radiation issue, when the students got interested in reading what the government
was saying about the safety of radioactive fallout, that caused great turmoil in the
trustees of the university.
And they invited a professor from the University of Illinois to apply for my job.
When he arrived, his invited speech on the topic of his choosing was on radiation biology.
And he said he started his lecture looking at his wrist and saying, "You notice I'm not
wearing a wristwatch."
He said, "I realized how much radiation was being emitted from the dial and threw my watch
away in a radioactive disposal."
And he not only didn't get the job he wanted to apply for, but he got fired from the University
of Illinois.
I wonder how many they had to go through before they found a proper replacement for you.
I never heard.
Yeah, well, it sounds like you're not alone out there.
And I know at one point you recommended to me a book called Cold War in Biology, which
certainly speaks to the politics that are going with the science.
Yeah, that's a good introduction to the politics of genetics in a broader sense, not just the
racist genetics that they were teaching in American universities, but the whole history
way back to the 19th century.
Yeah.
And maybe at some point we can cover that again.
I was hoping today that we'd talk about fats somewhat.
That's still a subject that's in the news all the time.
The government always makes recommendations for what kind of fats you should be eating,
and they seem to change their minds about every five years or so.
They come out with a new proclamation.
For a while they were telling you to avoid...
I remember when I was growing up, they told you to avoid greasy fried foods, which I think
at that time was vegetable oil, or I suppose it could have been coconut at that point,
but I think a lot of people were frying their foods.
And Wesson oil was the standard in the '50s when I was born in '55, so probably 1960 I
became aware of things like that.
So and then at some point they did tell you that those fats were good for you, the vegetable
oils, and that the thing to avoid was butter.
Yeah, Wesson oil was cottonseed oil.
Oh, was it?
I always thought that was corn.
Well maybe it was at some time, but in the '50s when I investigated it, it was cottonseed
oil.
That has a long history, way back Mark Twain in one of his books told about hearing a conversation
in the, I think, 1860s, people were on his boat talking about how they were going to
make Americans eat cottonseed oil instead of butter.
That's right.
Yeah, talk about... there's a fat conspiracy for you.
I think I read that.
They were planning... they were taking olive oil from Italy and then cutting it 10 to 1
with cottonseed oil.
About 10 years ago the FDA did a survey of all of the imported olive oil sold in the
U.S. and reported that 70% of it was adulterated still.
Is that right?
Well that's not too encouraging.
So I thought, I was thinking if you feel like it, maybe we could start with a bit of the
history of fat consumption, sort of what's traditionally been eaten by humans and how
that's evolved in the last century or so.
Well, in the 19th century my relatives were still preferring fat meat to lean meat and
the taste of it seemed to be an important guide.
People really didn't trim the fat from their meat because it tasted good.
It was fairly isolated areas where they used the exotic oils like extracted oils.
They just ate either oily fruits, the coconut itself, or avocados and sunflower seeds and
fat poultry and fat beef and pigs and so on.
I guess around the 18th century was when the industrial market started promoting cod liver
oil and some of the seed oils.
Even fish oil was primarily used for varnish and lamps right up until the time of petroleum
when petroleum became so cheap.
Then the plant and fish oils became too expensive and they went looking for new markets.
The coconut oil is easy to get out with primitive technology and so the oriental countries where
it was grown, they would boil the semi-dried coconut meat and float off the oil.
It was very cheap and was being used to feed chickens and pigs and such in the United States
and to make Oreo cookies for example.
Because of its cheapness it didn't get rancid.
But the agricultural industry in the 40s experimented and found that even though it was cheap it
stimulated the animals appetites and metabolic rates and caused them to eat more food and
gain less weight.
One reaction was to use chemical poisons to slow their metabolic rate by poisoning the
thyroid gland.
Another discovery was that if they used fish oil or linseed oil or cottonseed oil, any
of the unsaturated fats, they could slow the metabolic rate and make them put on fat more
cheaply.
So the seed oil industry now had a fairly good market in feeding pigs.
But around that time, around 1950, the petroleum chemists found a new use for petroleum other
than fuel, making paints and plastics out of it, where the fish oil and linseed oil
had been major bases for making paints and varnishes.
Now those markets were lost.
So the linseed oil industry in particular looked for new ways to sell their products
since the paint market was drying up.
And that was when the oil as an essential nutrient idea started being promoted.
The study that has been cited for many decades was performed in connection with the lard
industry.
That claimed that unsaturated fats were essential nutrients.
And so the linseed oil industry, because their product is rich in unsaturated fats, picked
up that isolated bit of research, which happened to be fairly unscientific because they had
neglected or ignored or suppressed the studies which previously had demonstrated that animal
thrived on a diet completely lacking the unsaturated fats or any fats in fact.
But that study was so promoted by the oil industry that it created the idea that the
unsaturated fats are essential nutrients.
So even though they claim they're essential, you're saying there was an experiment where
animals thrived without them?
Yeah, starting about 1910 to all through the 1920s, there were several experiments in which
animals were actually healthier when they didn't get any of the fats.
A German study that I saw, an abstract in biological abstracts, it was published in
1927, showed that as the animals received less fat in their diet, the incidence of cancer
decreased, and the cancer rate was directly proportional to the amount of fat in the diet.
And the fat study and the others that showed increased longevity were ignored in the research
that claimed the essentiality of the unsaturated fats.
Yeah, I mean, you hear that from so many people that they're essential, and I know it's just
sort of ubiquitous that these things are...
The University of Texas had a famous nutrition lab under Roger Williams, who wrote Nutrition
Against Disease in the '50s or '60s.
And in his lab in the 1940s, the rat disease that was supposedly caused by a deficiency
of essential fatty acids, the people in this Texas lab said, "That looks exactly like our
vitamin B6 deficiency disease."
And the B vitamins, only one or two of the B vitamins were known at the time the original
research was done.
But in the '40s, they had identified the deficiency disease specifically caused by a vitamin B6
deficiency.
And so they reproduced the diet fed in the 1929 research to their animals, but gave them
vitamin B6, and it completely cured the essential fatty acid deficiency without any essential
fatty acids.
And the apparent interpretation of what had happened, why the fat-free or low-fat diet
caused those symptoms was that the essential fatty acids suppressed the metabolic rate
as the pig farmers demonstrated.
And when your metabolism is suppressed, you don't eat as much food or drink as much water,
and so your nutritional requirements are depressed.
But if you stimulate their metabolism by not giving them the suppressive essential or unsaturated
fatty acids, then you will reveal a vitamin deficiency.
And as your metabolic rate increases, you eat more protein, and to process that protein,
you use up your vitamin B6 faster.
So do you think people are thinking that these symptoms that are caused by the vitamin B6
deficiency, they're blaming it on the lack of these EFAs?
There have been a few other isolated studies through the '50s and '60s.
Usually one patient would get eczema, and that would get published as proof that the
essential fatty acids deficiency disease existed.
But at that time, when they were giving a fat-free diet, they were often giving intravenous
feeding, and their concept of complete intravenous nutrition until well into the 1970s was radically
deficient in several of the essential known nutrients.
Zinc, for example, wasn't included.
And a biotin deficiency can produce some of the related symptoms, and when your metabolic
rate is high and you metabolize more protein, that's one of the deficiencies.
Zinc, biotin, B6 are among the first deficiencies to show up when you're having a high metabolic
rate and eating protein, but not a very rich vitamin source.
I see.
So you're saying the control group that wasn't being given the "essential fatty acids" weren't
getting any minerals and vitamins?
Yeah.
Several of the publications were on intravenous feedings that they called "complete nutrition."
Some hospitals were keeping babies on this intravenous feeding, and even though the nutrition
journals knew what the essential nutrients such as zinc were, hospitals refused to include
them because doctors weren't doing it, and it was just the nutritionists who said humans
needed zinc.
So it's a little confusing because I think people think they have a symptom, say eczema
or something like that, and some naturopathic consultant tells them to eat flax oil or something
like that.
Yeah.
If you suppress your metabolism, you can get under the metabolic rate at which you need
a certain amount of nutrition, and so you can cure a vitamin B6 deficiency or a biotin
or a zinc deficiency sometimes just by taking a toxic thing that suppresses your metabolism.
So you're saying in the long run, though, that has other bad effects.
Yeah.
The same with, for example, fish oil to suppress inflammation.
But even people who were advocating its use published reports showing radical suppression
of immunity by eating a moderate amount of fish oil.
David Horvath, for example, went on advocating polyunsaturated fats therapeutically, even
though he published evidence showing decisive suppression of the immune system.
You can get away with that for six months or a year, maybe a couple of years, suppressing
inflammation just by knocking out your immune system, but it's not good in the long run.
Right.
You also hear on the fish oil front, you hear that, I know some people take fish oil to
fight depression, and what's your take on that?
I've read all of the publications on it, and some of them say it makes depression worse.
Some say it doesn't do anything.
These are the studies you've seen.
Yeah.
And if you select the few that say it helped the certain group, you can truthfully report
that this group improved, but someone else reporting that their group got worse on fish
oil.
If there's a bias in the journal, who gets published, then you don't actually see the
empirical data that existed in the world, but not in the medical literature.
I see.
I just read a quote that you had used in one of your newsletters from somebody who used
to be the editor of the New England Journal of Medicine.
Portia Angel.
Yeah.
What was that quote, Ray?
Do you remember?
No.
It was something to the fact that you can't really tell the truth of the studies that
you're reading unless you know all the studies that they rejected, or something to that effect.
If you have probability at the 5% level, but if you rejected 10 or 20 or 100 publications
with negative results, you're biasing the statistics.
Well, maybe we should ... I don't think we've quite actually covered all the different fats.
Most people have questions about ... They probably want to know what is bad and what
is good.
Is canola as bad as cottonseed oil and those kind of things?
Maybe you could cover the spectrum there for a minute.
In the 1960s, there was a lot of concern that there was a special toxic fat in mustard oil,
rapeseed oil.
So, they bred a variety that didn't have that particular fatty acid, and that became canola.
But meanwhile, Hans Selye was experimenting, and he showed that giving rapeseed oil would
typically cause spots of tissue in the heart to die.
The mainstream medicine said that was because of the toxic fatty acid that the breeders
were eliminating.
But Hans Selye gave purified linoleic acid, a major component of rapeseed oil, and showed
that that was the actual toxic agent to the heart, not the so-called special toxic fatty
acid.
It was the most essential fatty acid itself that was killing heart cells.
And he added chocolate fat, cocoa butter, to the diet, and that protected the heart.
In spite of the same amount of linoleic acid in the diet, adding spuric acid in the cocoa
butter was protective.
I see.
So, it's the ratio that is important.
One of the early rat studies that got me interested in coconut oil was putting, I think there
were 15 different groups of rats on one series with pure coconut oil, high fat, low fat,
and medium fat.
Another one was pure, unsaturated, I think it was corn oil, high, medium, and low.
And they kept them on that diet throughout their lifespan.
And at the end of the normal lifespan, the fat rats were the ones on an unsaturated fat
diet.
The lean rats were the ones on the coconut saturated fat diet.
And the quantity of fat they ate didn't make any significant difference.
It was the ratio, the degree of unsaturation, corresponded to the degree of obesity at the
end of their lifespan.
So, the high fat, low fat isn't the issue, it's the unsaturation that is the problem.
I see.
And a series of French publications in the 1980s really defined what the pig farmers
had demonstrated practically.
The French showed biochemically how it works by using specific fatty acids on animals and
examining the effects on different components of the thyroid system.
And they showed that increasing the number of unsaturations, the two double bonds was
worse than mono-unsaturated, and three double bonds was worse than the two double bonds,
and the worst was the multiply unsaturated.
And every component of the thyroid system that they examined from the secretion of the
thyroid gland, its transport on proteins through the blood, and the cells response to it, each
of those components was selectively inhibited in proportion to the unsaturation of the oil
that the animal was getting.
It very neatly explained what the pig farmers found out economically.
That by slowing down the metabolism of the pig it would gain weight.
Yes.
With the unsaturated fat diet.
This is probably we should devote a whole show to the thyroid itself, but perhaps you
could just, I think a lot of people are not knowledgeable about what the thyroid does
for them and their body, and perhaps you could just summarize that.
The real thyroid hormone, the active part of it wasn't discovered until the 1950s, but
the function of the thyroid was studied since the mid and late 1900s, and it was known to
activate all of the organs of the body to respire, consume more oxygen, and perform
more perfectly.
And the deficiency of thyroid very early was learned to cause mental retardation or even
under development of the brain and idiocy and infertility that developed later was a
very early observation.
In some areas of the world, Cretans were good employees because they were passive and stupid
and didn't reproduce.
So there was the medical establishments in those areas didn't want to cure it because
they were good for herding sheep and such chores.
You're saying it was a form of eugenics or the opposite of eugenics actually?
Yeah.
And Brode Barnes in the 1930s did studies both on rabbits and in Europeans and showed
that the goiter gulps were highly susceptible to heart disease at a very young age.
In their 30s, they started having atherosclerosis and heart attacks.
And when iodine was introduced to those regions, the heart disease mortality decreased considerably.
But those areas also had a very high cancer rate, especially breast cancer.
And as recently as the 1980s, when I talked to some cancer biologists in Mexico, they
were reporting that the iodine deficient regions in the mountains around Mexico City still
had a very high rate of tuberculosis, heart disease and breast cancer.
All of the things that Brode Barnes had noticed in Eastern Europe in the 30s.
So, excuse me, but the iodine, deficiency of iodine slows your thyroid function?
Yeah.
In those regions, some specific regions, iodine deficiency or iodine deficiency resulting
from some particular food or contaminant, in those areas, iodine deficiency was the
thing that could be remedied.
But in many areas, the diet interacts with limited iodine so that it isn't just an iodine
deficiency, but it's eating vegetables that interrupt the formation of thyroid, even though
there is some iodine in their diet.
The cabbage family and the unsaturated fats are the two most famous causes of interrupted
formation of the thyroid hormone.
And people with low thyroid get goiters, which are big protrusions.
The pituitary gland produces thyroid stimulating hormones that compensate when your thyroid
is being blocked.
Naturally, estrogen inhibits the thyroid release too.
And so the body is designed so that if the estrogen is inhibiting the gland, the thyroid
stimulating hormone increases to overcome that block and activates the thyroid to work
harder.
And if you keep your estrogen or goitrogen high, the TSH works harder and harder and
the gland gets bigger and bigger until sometimes it gets to be as big as a cantaloupe.
Women at puberty and during pregnancy often get a fullness in the neck.
And that typically causes women to have creases in the skin of their neck above and below
the region where the thyroid is.
The thyroid gland is at the base of the neck on both sides of your windpipe.
Most women, but almost no men, have a defining crease right above their collarbone and just
above their Adam's apple.
And that defining crease is from a low thyroid?
Yeah, because at puberty, the thyroid gland naturally enlarges to overcome the effect
of estrogen.
And that makes a fullness so that the bending of the neck causes those creases to outline
the puffy area where the gland is.
And is that something that's completely normal?
Yeah, that's part of what makes women look attractive because it corresponds to the years
between puberty and menopause.
One of the things, going back to the essential fatty acids, which is ostensibly the subject
of the show, you said that one of the reasons it's ridiculous to call them essential is
that they're ubiquitous.
They're in everything, every green vegetable you eat.
And it's actually hard to get away from them.
So how we can have a deficiency is a good question.
It's a question of marketing and the idea that you could be deficient in something that
is in every organism, even tropical organisms.
Coconuts have about 2% of those fats, 1 to 3%.
And ruminants, sheep and cows and deer and such, have an organ to grow bacteria which
detoxify those plant fats.
But still, 1 or 2% of the fats get through the detox system of the rumen.
And so beef fat and lamb fat still have, unavoidably, about 2% of those unsaturated vegetable oils.
So even if you ate nothing but beef and lamb and coconuts, you'd still have more than anyone
ever claimed the essentiality required.
So by the most extreme ideas of essentiality, it's impossible, unless you eat a laboratory-prepared
diet, to have a deficiency.
But the marketing departments of the Linseed Oil companies and the Wesson Oil and so on,
they convinced people that since it's essential in a trace amount, it must be much better
in a very large amount.
But several more recent studies have demonstrated that as you increase the unsaturated fats
in the diet, the cancer incidence goes up more or less in proportion to the amount.
And when you extrapolate it to zero, the cancer incidence, just like the 1927 study, approaches
zero.
When you say extrapolate to zero, you mean no unsaturated fats?
Yeah.
Okay.
And fish oil, there's a lot of marketing of fish oil too as a supplement, just as a dietary
supplement, not necessarily for depression.
Yeah.
A few years ago, the FDA warned that the total shouldn't exceed, I think it was three grams
of DHA and EPA.
But they more recently have dropped that and have begun promoting it without the warning.
But it definitely becomes toxic as the immune suppression studies demonstrated.
And the odd thing about the fish oil is that it's so unstable.
The only reason it was a good varnish is that it oxidizes almost instantly at room temperature
even.
And in your body, it's mostly oxidized before it reaches your bloodstream.
It has to pass through your digestive system to reach the bloodstream.
And by the time it gets there, it has been heated and circulated in tiny particles exposed
to oxygen.
And so those so-called beneficial anti-inflammatory effects are actually produced by the oxidative
breakdown products of the fats.
And so even in the biochemistry of it, it's a toxic effect that is being sold as a benefit.
I see.
So it's suppressing your immune system and that's what's getting rid of some of your
symptoms perhaps.
Yeah.
It's the free radical oxidative decomposition products that are circulating in your blood
system.
A very small part of it reaches your tissues as the original starting DHA and DPA.
And Raymond, would you like to touch?
We're talking to Raymond Peet, by the way.
I should say that more often.
Endocrinologist and physiologist from Eugene, Oregon.
We're talking about mostly about fats today, but also we're talking about the marketing
of them and the scientific research that's gone into fats.
And how much does the marketing affect the scientific research?
You know, the media seems to still be very down on saturated fats and still promoting
unsaturated fats.
Yeah.
And they apparently have taken over the government because I see the government has basically
a promotion of fish oil on their website.
Would that be the FDA?
Is that the FDA or what's the website?
Okay.
And the industry, just like the soy oil industry has subsidized research on the health value
of soy oil, the fish oil industry is now rich enough that they are sponsoring conferences
and paying researchers to produce studies and getting people on boards of editorial
boards of the journals.
So just like the atomic energy industry controlling the research on the safety of radiation, the
health effects of the fats are being promoted by the industry, not by objective science.
Yeah.
And I think a lot of people are familiar with the global warming being contested by the
oil industry and all of the money they spend on research.
Now you mentioned cancer in terms of unsaturated oils.
Does that apply?
I guess fish oil is also very unsaturated oil and that applies to fish oil as well?
Except that the shorter 18 carbon oils that you get from seeds fit into our enzyme systems
more powerfully and so inhibit our own enzymes more powerfully.
The fish oils are very long and don't directly attack our enzymes in the same way.
They're unstable and spontaneously all by themselves turn into these free radical and
aldehyde toxins.
But they are safer to our enzyme systems because their number of carbons is very different
from the fats that we make or that we get from seeds.
And they also come with quite a few vitamins too that are good.
Yeah.
And when you squeeze an oily fish, you can't help getting some vitamin K, vitamin A, vitamin
D and a little E. But the E pretty much is destroyed quickly by the oxidative process.
But the B comes through very strongly because it's harder to oxidize the K and A probably
usually have enough activity to be of some benefit when you eat the fish oil.
I see.
So we have about five minutes left, Ray.
And I thought maybe we could quickly, people are probably wondering, well, what would you
think would be good to eat?
For instance, is olive oil okay, coconut oil, margarine?
Maybe you could run through the...
Okay.
The coconut oil is around 10% of the polyunsaturated fats.
And if you're only going to use half a teaspoon or so for flavoring a food or a teaspoonful
every other day or something, that is small enough that it isn't harmful.
As a minor flavoring, olive oil is fine.
I see.
But as a major part of the diet, I think butter, beef fat, lamb fat and coconut oil are the
safe ones and cocoa butter, chocolate.
And some studies have found that the longer saturated fats are very protective.
They're being investigated for curing cancer, heart disease.
And some of the best studies are using the long-chain saturated fats as well as ordinary
butter fat and so on for treating liver disease.
Alcoholic hepatitis, for example, is being successfully treated with saturated fat because
about 20 years ago, they noticed that alcoholic liver injury requires polyunsaturated fats
in the diet.
And some Hindus noticed that in the areas of India where they have primarily butter,
alcoholics don't get liver disease at the high rate that they do in the areas that get
the unsaturated fats.
And so the animal studies finally led to human studies in Chicago in which they are finding
actual cures of alcoholic liver disease just with a good diet plus the saturated fats.
Those ongoing studies now or there's something that...
Are they old or...
I haven't seen anything new in the last year or two.
Okay.
Yeah, they're recent.
I see.
And when you say long-chain, is that coconut oil?
Well, that goes up to 16 carbons and butter is 18 carbons.
And they are using experimentally some derived from sugarcane wax and other unusual long-chain
fats, but those are being used therapeutically in cancer too.
I see.
And the unsaturated oils are just in everything now because of course the government has sanctioned...
Our government has sanctioned them and you can't buy a potato chip that isn't cooked
in canola oil or some other vegetable, unsaturated vegetable oil.
So how do we...
If you say you go out to dinner, is there anything you can do to protect yourself?
About 15 years ago, there was this big campaign to get coconut oil off the market.
It in recent years is coming back and I think if people just nag the cooks in restaurants
and buyers in grocery stores, they can change things.
And it's changing back in the last few years to people demanding that they get real butter
and other saturated fats in products.
And finally, I think most people are worried about getting fat when you say butter, even
though we all love it, I think.
There's nothing that tastes better on things, but...
The animal studies from the industrial agriculture level all the way down to lab studies show
that the polyunsaturated are extremely fattening in proportion to their role in the diet.
The proportion to the saturated fats is more important than the actual quantity of fats.
I noticed in Finland where dairy foods are very common, basically probably the most common
food, just going across the border from Russia to Finland, you go from a starch-eating, vegetable-based
diet where everyone's fat over to a lean, healthy population where they eat lots of
butter fat.
In general, Americans who eat milk and milk products are lean, and it's partly the calcium
and vitamin D, but also the butter fat itself is helpful.
I guess that's the French paradox, again, that they always talk about.
How come the French are so healthy when they eat all that nasty saturated fat?
Yeah.
Well, Ray, I guess we're basically out of time.
Is there anything else you'd like to add?
We're talking to Raymond Peet, endocrinologist and physiologist from Eugene, Oregon.
People are concerned about skin health and appearance, and experiments with rabbits is
interesting.
Rabbits were put on either a corn oil diet or a coconut oil diet and shaved, and so the
sun would hit their skin.
Those on the unsaturated corn oil diet got wrinkly, sun-damaged skin, and the ones on
the saturated fat diet, as it's sun, it was relatively harmless to their skin.
Yeah, that's kind of telling, isn't it?
Well, Ray, thanks so much for being on today.
The hour flew by in what seemed like a couple minutes, and I appreciate you doing it.
Okay, thank you.
And I'll give out your website and contact, just your website information for people.
Okay, very good.
Thanks, Ray.
Bye-bye.
And that was Raymond Peet.
I hope you could hear some of that.
His voice was very weak.
But Ray Peet's website is raypeet.com, if you're interested.
It's that simple.
Ray Peet, spelled R-A-Y, and then P-E-A-T.com, and he has a lot of excellent articles on
his website.
If you have any questions for Politics and Science, you can direct them by email to politicsandscience@madriver.com.
That's politicsandscience@madriver.com.
Archive shows can be found at radio4all.net.
That's radio, the number 4, all, dot net.
Politics and Science presents the viewpoints of its participants and does not necessarily
reflect the viewpoints of any other person or organization.